Introduction
	Seventh Schedule of the Constitution vests the Central Government with the responsibility of
	national defence.

Need for Raising Defence Expenditure
	security threats not just from the borders with Pakistan and China, but also
	from the Indian Ocean Region.
	Transformation in defence production requires higher allocation.
	India’s defence sector requires $130-150 billion for modernisation and
	restructuring in order to become self-reliant.
	‘Make in India’ in defence production.
	 low budget will act as a constraint for mega acquisition.
	 Indian Army is in need of modern guns and ammunitions, combat vehicles and battle tanks. 
	 Air Force is in urgent need of the latest fighter jets.
	 Navy is keen on new warships and nuclear submarines.
	 Defence projects worth around billions of dollars are not moving due to paucity of funds

 Present Status
 	defence expenditure is at 1.49% of GDP,lowest ever.
 	lower than what it was prior to the disastrous 1962 war with China.  2.78% in 2009-10
 	Large share of resources is going towards human resources costs,.
 	With OROP and the new Pay Commission

Recommendations
	Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence recommended that expenditure on defence be
	increased to at least 3% of GDP.
	This will address the problems of national security and underline the government’s commitment towards the military.

Spending Constraints
	 increase would have to be on the capital side of the defence budget.
	 Salaries, pensions and other operating expenses have full fund allocation with little scope to absorb extra funds.
	 Raising the defence capital expenditure would leave the government with very little money for
	 infrastructure and asset creation.
	 very little for education, health, police and public infrastructure.
	 As most defence equipment is procured from foreign countries, an increased capital budget would increase the defence import bill, and add to the current account deficit.
	 The existing allocation for defence for 2018-19 is 27% of the total tax revenue, which will shoot up to 38% if the allocation is raised to 3% of GDP.
	 This will require either an increase in the current tax rates, or a widening of the tax base.

 Concerns / Challenges
 	national security
 	 dangerous neighbourhood 
 	 procedural delays
 	 Focus continues to remain on addressing existing revenue expenditure
 	  bureaucratic delays

  Way Forward
  	 fixing the current imbalance in the defence budget.
  	 Optimise the existing defence allocations
  	  strengthen its planning mechanism.
  	   holistic and
	integrated defence plan that takes into account the scarcity of resource as well as the genuine
	security needs of the country.
	