Introduction:

	 fossil fuel energy will decline markedly by 2050.shale gas and oil are likely to be abundant and available.

 Shale Gas and Oil Salient Features:

 	unconventional natural resources. They are found at 2,500-5,000 metres below the earth’s surface.
 	deeper in comparison to conventional crude oil found at 1,500 metres.
 	deep vertical drilling followed by horizontal drilling.
 	most common way to extract shale gas is ‘hydraulic fracturing’ (fracking), this is nothing but sending high volumes of water mixed with certain chemicals to break the rocks and release the trapped energy minerals.

Hydraulic Fracturing: Most Common way to extract Shale Gas:
	pumping fluid into a wellbore to create enough pressure to crack or fracture the rock layer.
	The fluid usually contains a “proppant,” like sand, that helps keep the fractures open to allow oil and gas to be produced to the well.

Guidelines Issued on Environmental Management:
	overall volume of fracture fluid is 5 to 10 times that of conventional methods”.
	Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process.
	EIA process, however, does not differentiate between conventional and unconventional hydrocarbons.
	the fracturing activities are likely to deplete water sources and cause pollution due to the disposal of flow-back water.

Negative Consequences by using the Shale Gas:
	It requires large amounts of water,
	larger surface area.
	impact irrigation and other local requirements.
	cause tremors on the deeper areas of earth
	risk of pollution to nearby underground water.
	underground pollution are reported in US and Canada.

Conclusion:
	policy on shale gas and oil in 2013
	western countries like Germany and France and sub-national Governments like Scotland have banned fracking.

Way Forward:
	 water stress, contamination of groundwater, and related health hazards.
	 comprehensively regulate the fracking process
	 ector-specific EIA manual on exploration and production of unconventional hydrocarbon resources may be a good idea.