Introduction:
	subject to citizen
	individuals come together in webs of associational life
	capacity to challenge the brute power of the state through petitions, protests, dharnas and ultimately judicial activism.
	Given unresponsive political parties, citizens can access centres of power and privilege only through a vibrant civil society.

A vital sphere: A Vibrant Civil Society:
	The only sphere that stands between the individual and the omnipresent and omnipotent state is civil society.
	civil liberty and human rights groups are an essential precondition for human well-being.
	right not to be tortured or killed, to the right not to be arrested and imprisoned by the lackeys of the state without due cause.
	social democratic state vide civil society activism.
	Human rights activists are among these few organisations. They have courageously taken on the challenge posed by corporates, a ruthless state
	crucial for democracy because today we are ruled by a government that openly defies ethics and morality

The Role of Civil Society in present problems in our society:
	The present-day market economy is neither sympathy nor room for citizens exploited by the State and it looks at its own need for resources, labour and profit.
	gaps left by the government in the development process
	 NGO’s like Childline India Foundation, World Vision, Arambh India
	 Supplementing the government effort to provide health care to citizens
	 educating citizens
	 influence policy and project formulation

 Why do we need an active civil society?
 	right to scrutinise the work
 	reasonable standard of life for the citizens.
 	Article 19 
 	right to participate in an activity

Conclusion:
	backbone of democracy
	hold power holders accountable.
	Gandhian tradition of volunteerism
	politics of voice
	collective action in civil society.

Way Forward:
	strong and vigilant civil society
	lines of the US False Claims Act should be enacted
	A free media 
	Use of ICT in systems of governance
	high priority items in civil society’s agenda.